# Introduction #

TwixT is a two-player abstract strategy game invented by Alex Randolph. It is a member of the connection game family, along with games such as Hex, Havannah, Y, PÜNCT and **Star.
3M originally published TwixT as part of its Bookshelf Games line; Avalon Hill took over publication at a later date. TwixT is no longer produced in the United States of America, although Schmidt Spiele produced copies of the game in Germany, and Kosmos published a version of the game in 1998. Hasbro owns the rights to Twixt since it acquired Avalon Hill, but it hasn't published the game.
Twixt is played on board with a 24×24 grid of holes, with the four corners missing. The rows around the four edges of the board are called border rows. In the 3M edition, the two players are Red and Black. Different sets may use different colors. The topmost and bottommost rows belong to the lighter color, and the leftmost and rightmost rows belong to the darker color.**

# Rules #

**The players take turns placing pegs of their respective colors on the board, one peg per turn.**<br>
<b>The player with the lighter color makes the first move.</b><br>
<b>A player may '''not''' place a peg on their opponent's border rows.</b><br>
<b>To counteract first-move advantage, the pie rule is suggested. After the first peg is placed, the second player has the option to swap sides. This is typically indicated by turning the pieces box end for end, or swapping boxes if they are separate. If the second player chooses not to swap immediately after the first peg is placed, then sides may not be swapped later in that game. (This "one-move equalization" was added by Randolph after 3M published his game. It is present in the Schmidt Spiele edition and all later editions.)</b><br>
<b>After placing a peg, you may ''link'' one or more pairs of pegs on the board which are all your own colour.  The links can only go between two pegs a knight's move away from each other, and cannot cross another link; they block other links, most importantly the opponent's. As part of your move, you may remove your own links (but not your opponent's) in order to rearrange the sequence of links on the board.</b><br>
<b>The object is to make a continuous chain of linked pegs connecting your border rows. If neither side can achieve this, the game is a draw.</b><br>

<h2>Basic Patterns</h2>

Despite such a large grid, games are frequently over before both sides have each made 25 moves. The tactics are very sharp and unforgiving. A knowledge of the most common peg patterns can help guide your eye towards the best move choices.<br>
<br>
A '''setup''' is a pattern of two pegs of the same color which can connect to each other in a single move in two different ways. The gap between these pegs is generally difficult for the opponent to attack, since if one connection is blocked then the other is usually still available. There are five setups, each characterized by a name and by two numbers which represent the horizontal and vertical distances between these pegs. The larger value is listed first.<br>
<br>
The yellow holes indicate where a third peg of the same color would form a double link connection. The red holes indicate possible points of attack for the opponent. For example, against white's beam setup in the top left, black could play at F7 which would link to H8. Placing a linked peg adjacent to a lone opposing peg this way is called a '''hammer attack'''. Black threatens to cut past E7 on one side or the other. In the top right, white could attack black's 3-3 tilt setup by linking to T8, threatening <a href='https://code.google.com/p/twixt/source/detail?r=9'>R9</a> or S10. Of course white would also be threatening in other directions, but our concern for the moment is just with setups and how to attack them. In the bottom right, black could launch a hammer attack with a link to S17, threatening Q16 or <a href='https://code.google.com/p/twixt/source/detail?r=15'>R15</a>. Against the remaining two setups, the 2-0 mesh and the 1-1 short, a simple hammer attack will not work, because the two double linking paths are too widely separated. That does not mean that those setups are completely invulnerable, however.<br>
<br>
There are plenty of other ways to place two pegs of the same color so that the gap between them is difficult to attack. The next diagram shows a few of them. The 5-2 gap is particularly strong. These two pegs can be connected in two moves in a variety of ways, usually too many for the opponent to block them all. The 5-0 gap is slightly more vulnerable. For example, if the O7 peg is unlinked, white might be able to attack at Q7. Then if black plays <a href='https://code.google.com/p/twixt/source/detail?r=6'>R6</a> threatening P5 or Q8, white could play O8, threatening N6 or <a href='https://code.google.com/p/twixt/source/detail?r=5'>R5</a>.<br>
<br>
The 3-0 gap involves some very tricky tactics. For example, if black tries to attack with an unlinked peg at O15, white could respond with N16 which threatens to double link at P15.<br>
<br>
The 4-2 gap is technically not a setup, because there is only one way to connect these pegs in one move. But without a nearby peg, it may be difficult for black to attack this pattern anyway. If black plays L20, white could respond at K20 or at M20, forming a combination of a coign setup and a short setup. Since the short setup is so difficult to attack, white will probably manage to connect J21 to N19, albeit in three moves rather than one. White might also respond to L20 with either K21 or M19, which is much more complicated.<br>
<br>
It's '''usually good enough''' to play close to the peg you want to connect to, since the most important thing is to '''block your opponent.''' You'll probably be able to complete the connection later in the game. For example, in the 4-3 gap, if white attacks with H14 black might respond with H15, which is a 2-2 gap from F17. This is four knight's moves away, but physically the pegs are close. If white continues the attack with G16 then black has H16 which threatens to double link at J15.<br>
<br>
Here are a few more useful gaps to know. This is by no means an exhaustive list. The 6-1 gap can be vulnerable to attack like the 5-0 gap in the previous plate. With a white peg on H8 as shown, White could attack at H4, with the idea that black J4<b>would be answered by white F5</b>. In general, the "skinnier" the pattern of connecting holes is, such as with the 6-1 and 5-4 gaps, the more easily this gap could be attacked if the opponent has a peg close enough. But if there is no nearby opposing peg, such a pattern might be preferred because it crosses a large gap in few moves. An extreme example of this would be to extend a straight line of knight's moves by playing a 6-3 gap or 8-4 etc. If by making such a move you are also making another threat in another direction, this could be the most efficient possible use of the board. There are of course lots of gaps which would take three or more moves to connect. Shown here is the 7-3. Here black threatens to turn this into a "beam-tilt combination" by playing in either green hole (N15 or M18), or black might link to either blue hole (L16<b>or O17</b>) which would reduce this to a 5-2 gap.<br>
<br>
The following diagrams use '''diagonal guide lines''' which emanate from the four corners of the common playing area. They are intended as a frame of reference on this huge grid of holes. They can help you see which side is going to win a corner battle.<br>
<br>
The moves for each battle are numbered. One player makes the odd numbered moves, and the other player makes the even numbered moves. The notation shows an asterisk <b>for each link added to the peg that was just placed.</b>

In the top left, black can hammer white with 1.G6<b>. If white responds with 2.D7</b> then after 3.E5<b>4.C5</b> 5.C4<b>black has reached the crucial diagonal leading to B2. The top right shows the result of a similar fight with colors reversed, except here the hammer attack at T7 did not work because black was one row closer to the black border row, and black gained the crucial diagonal.</b>

In a local battle, it is often a good idea to play where your opponent would like to play. In the bottom right, white has played 1.U21 which is a 2-1 block, or '''linking block,''' of the opponent and also forms a beam setup with U17. There are generally two ways to attack such a block, either a coign attack with 2.V21, or a short hammer attack with 2.T21. Neither attack works here. After 1.U21 2.V21 3.W20<b>4.T22</b><b>5.V22</b> white gains the corner. The bottom left is a mirror image, and shows the result after 1.D21 2.E21 3.F22<b>which threatens to cut through black's short setup with a double link at E20.</b>

In the top left of this next diagram, white has another type of hammer attack. 1.G6 is called a mesh hammer. This works here because the white border row is so close that white can cut past black with either F4<b>or H4</b>, and also the 2-0 mesh setup between G6 and G8 is invulnerable to a simple hammer counterattack by black. The top right is a mirror image, and shows the result after 1.<a href='https://code.google.com/p/twixt/source/detail?r=6'>R6</a> 2.Q6<b>3.S4</b> 4.S7<b>5.T7</b><b>.</b>

The bottom left shows one way to defeat the mesh hammer attack. Black's "net" cannot be pierced by white in this instance. After 1.G20 2.H20 black threatens to cut through white's mesh setup with F19. The bottom right is a mirror image which shows the point of black's defense.<br>
<br>
Perhaps the best way to become familiar with tactics is to work through some puzzles. Many are available at <a href='http://www.ibiblio.org/twixtpuzzles/'>http://www.ibiblio.org/twixtpuzzles/</a> in an interactive format. If you prefer not to allow Javascript, that same page has a link to download the puzzles, or most of the same puzzles are at <a href='http://www.gamerz.net/pbmserv/Twixt/puzzles.html'>http://www.gamerz.net/pbmserv/Twixt/puzzles.html</a>